Create data retention adr (#1459)
alphagov/email-alert-api: docs/adr/adr-005-data-retention.md

# Decision Record: Data Retention

---

## Context

> In November 2020 we wanted to document our changes to data retention.  The

Author: I've removed the reference to the current date but left the date for the original ADR as I think it adds some nice context on when the last iteration of data retention was.

original ADR concerning this resides [here][initial policy] and outlines our
approach from February 2018. A lot has changed since then, namely how we handle
spent data that no longer serves a purpose in the system.

We originally retained all data produced by EmailAlertApi (apart from emails
which are [archived] to S3 & [deleted] after a week). This included subscribers
which have been [nullified], ended subsciptions and subscriber lists with no
subscriptions to name a few.

These records were originally kept as we didn't know what data was useful. Now,
nearly 3 years on we have a pretty good understanding of what data we should
keep and what we should remove from the system completely.

[archived]: ...
[deleted]: ...
[nullified]: ...
[initial policy]: https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/blob/master/docs/adr/adr-003-initial-data-retention.md

---

## Decision

The decision we came to was to implement a [worker] which ran periodically

> every day at [midday] to remove data we classify as historic.

Author: Sure, added an explanation.

To deem data as historic we had to be sure that firstly, the system no longer
uses the data and secondly, we don't need the data for future analytics.

A general maximum retention period was suggested of 1 year which seems a
reasonable compromise between collecting analytics / maintaing a healthy
database. This retention period was implemented differently for each model
depending on the model. E.g for content changes we compare against `created_at`
but for subscriptions we compare against `ended_at`.

> The benefit of removing unused data which is deemed as historic is that we can

Author: Moved to the context section and explained the primary motivation.

keep the db tidy and relevant. Perpetually keeping this data results in a
detrimental effect on the db performance and complicates our auditing and

> analysis.

Author: Sure, have expanded on the _why_ .

> On the first run of deleting historical data we removed over 30 million

Author: Moved to the consequences section 👍

records. The biggest bloat of records belongs to the digest run subscribers
which produces ~400,000 records per day, followed by matched content changes
~10,000 and ended subscriptions ~4000, as of 05/11/2020.

Below lists each model in EmailAlertApi and explains how we determined whether
the associated records should be classified as historic and subsequently
deleted.

[midday]: https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/blob/master/config/sidekiq.yml#L23-L25
[worker]: https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/blob/a62abc85453b723d683c2dc13f3bf0065fb86d5f/app/workers/historical_data_deletion_worker.rb

### ContentChange & Message

We decided to remove content changes / messages which have a `created_at` value
of over a year old.

> This was decided as we have no use for them existing past the point of their

Author: Yep, correct, have updated to use 'system'.

last corresponding email being generated and sent out. The processing of a
content change or message should happen promptly (within hours of creation).

### MatchedContentChange & MatchedMessage

Matched content changes and matched messages get cascaded when their parent
content change / message is deleted. Again, these don't serve any purpose once
all the emails have been generated for an update.

### DigestRun

Digest runs are created every day (daily digest) and an extra time on a
Saturday (weekly digest) totaling 8 digest runs a week. This isn't a vast
number but nonetheless we should clean them up with the same reasoning as
content changes.

Removed once their `created_at` value is over a year old.

### DigestRunSubscriber

Digest run subscribers get cascaded when their parent digest run gets deleted.

After the digest run subscriber email has been sent we no longer need these
records.

### Subscription

Subscriptions are deleted when they've been ended for over a year, based on
their `ended_at` value. Once a subscription is ended it can't currently be made
active again and so can be deleted.

> ### SubscriberList

Author: Sure thing. I've split them into two distinct policies within the `SubscriberList` section which should make it easier to read.

Subscriber lists are deleted when they're over 7 days old and have no
subscriptions at all (e.g. when a user quits signup journey midway through), or when
they have no active subscriptions with their most recent subscription being
over a year old.

Subscriber lists which have no subscriptions at all have very little value for

> our analytics and actually can have a determental impact when we analyze the

Author: I've made reference to this in the 'context' section of the ADR so have removed this paragraph.

deleted by this point so we just query for nullified subscribers with no
subscriptions at all.

### Email

Emails don't get deleted by the [HistoricalDataDeletionWorker] as they
should've already been removed via the [email deletion mechanism].

If an old email does exist and belongs to a historic deactivated subscriber
then the historic worker will throw an error when the subscriber deletion is
attempted. This is due to a db restriction which stops us blindly removing
records that shouldn't exist in the first place which prevents us from covering
up a system bug.

### SubscriptionContent

Subscription contents are cascaded when their parent email is deleted and so
shouldn't exist when the historic worker is run for the same reasoning as
emails.

[HistoricalDataDeletionWorker]: https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/blob/a62abc85453b723d683c2dc13f3bf0065fb86d5f/app/workers/historical_data_deletion_worker.rb
[email deletion mechanism]: https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/blob/a62abc85453b723d683c2dc13f3bf0065fb86d5f/app/workers/email_deletion_worker.rb

---

## Status

Accepted

---

## Consequences

### Only retaining historic data for a year or under

> We don't believe we need the data we're cleaning up but we may have to tweak

Author: Okay dokay, I've removed that paragraph.

# Decision Record: Data Retention

---

## Context

The original ADR concerning data retention resides [here][initial policy] and
outlines our approach from February 2018. A lot has changed since then, namely
how we handle unused data that no longer serves a purpose in the system.

We originally retained all data produced by EmailAlertApi (apart from emails
which are [archived] to S3 & [deleted] after a week). This included subscribers
which have been [nullified], ended subsciptions and subscriber lists with no
subscriptions to name a few.

These records were originally kept forever as we didn't know what data was
useful. Now, nearly 3 years on, we have a pretty good understanding of what data
we should keep and what we should remove from the system completely.

> Our primary motivation is to increase the amount of digest subscriptions we

Author: Haha oh no, we deffo don't want to do that 😄 Corrected!

have versus individual subscriptions. This prompted a general review of data
retention as we knew that the system already produced a sizeable amount of
digest run subscribers (400k a day) which don't get cleaned up and just reside
in the db.

The benefit of removing unused data which is deemed as historic is that we can

> keep the db tidy and relevant. Perpetually keeping this data results in a

Author: I've gone with your suggestion although, personally, I don't think you need evidence to state that an ever growing unmanaged database will suffer from reduced performance, eventually.

detrimental effect on the db performance and complicates our auditing and
analysis. An example of how dead data can skew our analytics can be found when
we look at subscriber lists. We have over ~73,000 of these lists with active
subscribers, but in the last week alone, we've accumulated 1139 lists which
don't have any subscriptions at all (ended or active). These dead lists prevent
us from doing simple things easily, like determining which lists are actually
in use.

[archived]: ...
[deleted]: ...
[nullified]: ...
[initial policy]: https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/blob/master/docs/adr/adr-003-initial-data-retention.md

---

## Decision

The decision we came to was to implement a [worker] which runs periodically
every day at [midday] to remove data we classify as historic. Removing this
data was deemed as non urgent and so deleting once a day, in hours, seemed
suffice.

To deem data as historic we had to be ensure that the system no longer
uses the data, and we don't need the data for future analytics.

We decided:

* On a max retention of 1 year for everything that's unused by the system.

> * On a shorter retention of 7 days for subscriber lists with no subscriptions,

Reviewer: We should explain why here. (We want to get rid of unused lists ASAP to avoid them polluting our analytics.)

Author: Have added an explanation, pointing back to the context where I've given an example.

  active or ended.

> * To [modify the nullify process] and retire the [deactivated] concept while

Author: Certainly.

  keeping the retention unchanged.

* Not to modify the retention for emails (and subscription contents).

> A general maximum retention period was suggested of 1 year which seems a

Author: Sure, I've removed that sentence and been more specific around what we need for analytics!

reasonable compromise between collecting analytics / maintaining a healthy
database.

[midday]: https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/blob/master/config/sidekiq.yml#L23-L25
[worker]: https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/blob/a62abc85453b723d683c2dc13f3bf0065fb86d5f/app/workers/historical_data_deletion_worker.rb
[deactivated]: https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/pull/1462
[modify the nullify process]: https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/pull/1462/commits/c1ebdc3c83428516d9fe7a26bc093eb950c80284

---

## Status

Accepted

---

## Consequences

On the first run of deleting historical data we removed over 30 million
records. The biggest bloat of records belongs to the digest run subscribers
which produces ~400,000 records per day, followed by matched content changes

> ~10,000 and ended subscriptions ~4000, as of 05/11/2020.

Author: I've adjusted the structure / these numbers to make a bit more sense which should answer your question.

The retention period was implemented differently for each model depending on
the model. E.g for content changes we compare against `created_at` but for
subscriptions we compare against `ended_at`. Below lists each model in
EmailAlertApi and explains how we determined whether the associated records
should be classified as historic.

### ContentChange & Message

We decided to remove content changes / messages which have a `created_at` value
of over a year old.

> This was decided as the system no longer has use for them existing past the

Author: Yep, agreed.

# Decision Record: Data Retention

---

## Context

The original ADR concerning data retention resides [here][initial policy] and
outlines our approach from February 2018. A lot has changed since then, namely
how we handle unused data that no longer serves a purpose in the system.

We originally retained all data produced by EmailAlertApi (apart from emails
which are [archived] to S3 & [deleted] after a week). This included subscribers
which have been [nullified], ended subsciptions and subscriber lists with no
subscriptions to name a few.

These records were originally kept forever as we didn't know what data was
useful. Now, nearly 3 years on, we have a pretty good understanding of what data
we should keep and what we should remove from the system completely.

> Recent work to [migrate subscribers to daily digest emails] has lead to an

Author: I've rejigged this section which should flow better.

increase in the amount of digest subscriptions we have versus individual
subscriptions. This prompted a general review of data retention as we knew that
the system already produced a sizeable amount of `DigestRunSubscriber` records
(~430,000 a day) which don't get cleaned up and just reside in the db.

> The benefit of removing unused data which is deemed as historic is that we can

Author: I've restructured this section which means it should flow better.

There is no evidence of needing unused data for analytics beyond 1 year and so
we can classify this old data as historic and remove it.

We can split this unused data into two categories.

Event data - which is only used for a short period after being created, and
subsequently for analytics, which includes:

* ContentChange & Message - removed once their `created_at` value is over a
  year old.

* MatchedContentChange & MatchedMessage - cascaded when their parent content
  change / message is deleted.

* DigestRun - removed once their `created_at` value is over a year old.

* DigestRunSubscriber - cascaded when their parent digest run gets deleted.

Subscriber data - which is used indefinitely until it's marked as "ended", which
includes:

* Subscription - removed when they've been ended for over a year, based on
  their `ended_at` value. Once a subscription is ended it [can't currently be
  made active again] and so can be deleted.

* SubscriberList - removed when they have no active subscriptions and their
  latest, ended subscription is over a year old.

* Subscriber - removed once their `created_at` is over a year old and they
  don't have any subscriptions (active or ended).

> ### Shorter retention of 7 days for subscriber lists with no subscriptions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Shorter retention of 7 days for subscriber lists that have never been used
```

Minor: we should avoid ambiguity between inactive subscriptions (we'd also say "no subscriptions" in this case) and having none at all.

We also remove subscriber lists which have no subscriptions (active or ended)

> and are over 7 days old. As mentioned in the context section, dead subscriber

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and are over 7 days old. As mentioned in the context section, unused subscriber
```

We use the term "dead" elsewhere to refer to lists that won't ever have matched changes against them.

lists pollute our analytics and should be removed regularly.

A scenario of when this can happen is when a user quits their signup journey
midway through. 7 days was the chosen retention period to allow users to complete
their signup journey as they have a [7 day limit] to confirm their
subscription.

> ### Modified the nullify process and retired the deactivated concept

Author: I've added some context on how this related to the data retention work and moved it the the consequence section as you're right this does feel more like a consequence than part of the active decision.

> The [deactivated] concept was a point of confusion in the email system

Author: Yup, moved it to a more fitting spot.

and wasn't actually needed so has been removed. It revolved around the

> `deactivated_at` field on the subscriber model. This field was mainly used as a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`deactivated_at` field on the subscriber model. This field was only used as a
```

Minor: to avoid sounding like we're not sure if we broke something 😄.

Author: 😆

means of determining when a subscriber could be nullified. We can however
obtain this information via the most recent ended subscription of the
subscriber (based on the subscriptions `ended_at`) which means `deactivated_at`
is superfluous.

In doing this we've also [modified the nullify process] which now only
nullifies subscriber's addresses if they have no active subscriptions and their
most recent is over 28 days old. We also nullify subscribers which have no
subscriptions and are older than 28 days which prevents us from storing user's
personal data longer than needed, if for whatever reason, a subscriber ends up
with no subscriptions. See examples of where this happened [here][sub bug] and
[here][sub bug two].

> ### Not to modify the retention for emails (and subscription contents)

Reviewer: Minor: we could move this section earlier, to help a future reader understand why we don't mention these models in previous sections.

Author: Sure, this is now the first section.

[deactivated]: https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/pull/1462
[sub bug]: https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/pull/1462/commits/233bbff97a6a646da3afd0919a8ce388aee0f84f
[sub bug two]: https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/pull/1462/commits/9c37e836d8ae218f4c9e8d1cd7cbca093d5fc59d
[can't currently be made active again]: https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/blob/master/docs/adr/adr-003-data-retention.md#subscriber-and-subscription
[7 day limit]: https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/blob/f0c61539f7244bdb52db54d277a46412b728d642/app/services/auth_token_generator_service.rb#L7

---

## Status

Accepted

---

## Consequences

On the first run of deleting historical data we removed over 33 million
records. A breakdown of the amount of deletions per model can be found below:

* ContentChange - 148,617

* MatchedContentChange - 1,825,983

* Message - 15

* MatchedMessage - 16,099

* DigestRun - 677

* DigestRunSubscriber - 30,858,770

* Subscription - 1,046,576

* SubscriberList - 11470

* Subscriber - 196,376

We have some model specific consequences concerning the removal of historic
data which are captured below:

> * SubscriberList

Author: Yep!

> It is possible for subscriber lists to gain active subscriptions after being

Author: Sure - I've acknowledged the decision in the.... decision section! 😄

deemed as historic and deleted, this seems unlikely if they haven't had any
active subscriptions in over a year, or any subscriptions at all for more than
7 days. EmailAlertApi would create a new subscriber list if this was to happen.

> * Subscriber

Author: I was thinking one of the consequences is that we can't delete subscribers we should be able to delete due to the app potentially changing going forward.

I suppose this is part of the decision though and not a consequence, arghh! 😄
